Trade and your wider team as well. There will be questions for you throughout
this hearing as well. I'd like to hand over to you initially, Minister, for some
opening remarks. We have just received a copy of your
comments, but you may wish to pick your favorite
and read it out, I suppose.
Well, thanks for the chance to make opening remarks on foreign affairs.
The severe geopolitical challenges we are navigating leave no doubt that
we are operating in the toughest international environment any can
remember.
We have seen the global order disrupted by intensifying strategic competition,
the erosion of longstanding rules and norms, and further entwining of economic
interests with security concerns.
These already negative trends are accelerating and deepening, creating severe
headwinds as we pursue our national interests.
For New Zealand, geography is no buffer from a challenging world.
Our prosperity and security remain directly linked to global stability, to open
markets and supply routes, and to the strength of our international relationships.
Against this backdrop, the government's approach is an active, pragmatic,
and highly engaged foreign policy.
We are clear that New Zealand must operate in the world as it is,
not as we would wish it to be, and that realism, diplomacy, and sustained
engagement must underpin our approach.
This means sustained energy and urgency in our diplomatic activity.
High-level engagement remains a priority across every region, reflecting
our firm view that diplomacy grounded in face-to-face engagement,
listening and understanding is indispensable in a more contested, more volatile,
and more fragmented world.
Our immediate region remains central to the effort.
In the Pacific, the government continues to deepen relationships through extensive
engagement, including multiple visits and direct discussions across the
region.
We look ahead to hosting and chairing the Pacific Islands Forum
in 2027.
Our investment in
these partnerships will ensure we are well-positioned to support
regional leadership and regional priorities.
Our close cooperation is translating into tangible outcomes.
Over the past year, New Zealand has signed new agreements with Pacific partners,
including a defense and security declaration with the Cook Islands, a political
declaration with Niue, and a statement of partnership with Kiribati.
We continue to build on these strong foundations,
expanding practical cooperation with Pacific countries across areas including
infrastructure, resilience, and security.
Our support is delivering meaningful outcomes on the ground, from
education to disaster preparation and climate
adaptation. At the same time, we are significantly lifting our engagement with
Asia, recognizing its central importance to New Zealand's prosperity and
security today and into the future.
We are strengthening our partnerships across South,
Southeast, and North Asia,
concluding new comprehensive strategic partnerships over the past year with
Singapore, Vietnam, the Republic of Korea, and
ASEAN, and a significant uplift of our relationship with India.
Active engagement with key regional partners on fuel supply and broader supply
chain security in support of our national resilience remains a
priority.
Our focus, as we navigate the ongoing economic
reverberations of the Middle East conflict.
Our economic diplomacy, more broadly, is delivering concrete
gains. Our work continues to successfully
resolve non-tariff barriers affecting hundreds of millions of
dollars in trade,
expand market access opportunities through new trade agreements,
including the comprehensive economic partnership agreement with the United States,
Arab Emirates, and support Kiwi firms making
strong export gains, including in Europe and the UK
markets.
Including shutting down the discussion outside in the corridor when we're trying to
conduct a select committee hearing.
You hear that?
Including shutting down-- There's this noise in the corridor while we're trying to
conduct a select committee hearing.
I think there is a bit of noise coming from the corridor.
It would be helpful just to remind them.
Thank you.
Well, as Ali G would say, "Make a bit, have a bit of a speck."
Major trade missions and commercial arrangements, including to China, have secured
significant outcomes for New Zealand firms.
With total exports reaching New Zealand 81.7
billion as of April 2026, we are seeing solid growth despite a
challenging global environment, including tariff disruptions.
Alongside this, we remain focused on maintaining and strengthening our
relationships with traditional and like-minded partners, including Australia,
United States, United Kingdom, Canada, Japan, and Europe.
These partnerships must be sustained at the highest levels as we enhance our
cooperation across
defense, security, and economic priorities.
In this more contested world,
New Zealand is playing an active role in global and regional security efforts.
Our support for Ukraine through financial assistance, sanctions, and participation
in international coalitions, as well as our diplomacy and
efforts to address conflict in the Middle East and to protect critical
global supply routes, demonstrates our commitment.
We also remain
active in multilateral settings, advocating for adherence to international law
and pushing for reform of the international system, including
through co-chairing work to improve the effectiveness of the United Nations.
And this work will continue alongside efforts to help shape emerging global
rules in areas such as space, cyberspace, oceans governance, and
international nuclear
and non-proliferation.
We are also adapting to the realities of a changing international system by
working through smaller groupings of like-minded partners such as the
European Indo-Pacific Partners, Four-Plus Four foreign ministers meeting,
to advance our interests more effectively.
Taken together, these efforts reflect a
clear and consistent approach One that recognizes the scale of the challenges
we face, but also the opportunities available to New Zealand when we
act with purpose, energy, and clarity.
New Zealand's voice matters, but it must continue to be actively exercised.
Our influence will depend on the strength of our partnerships, the credibility of
our actions, and our willingness to contribute to both regional stability
and global solutions.
In this more volatile world, diplomacy has never been more important.
The ability to build understanding and find common ground, and advance our
interests through engagement remains central to our success.
The Budget 2026 outcomes reflect
this reality, with a funding package of 275 million for
both foreign affairs over four years.
This is focused on sustaining a resilient and secure network of overseas
posts, increasing our development and humanitarian funding in the Pacific and
wider Indo-Pacific, and delivering on New Zealand's responsibilities as
the host of the Pacific Islands Forum
in 2027.
Any questions?
There may be one or two.
All right, thank you for those opening comments, Minister.
We have a structured agenda that you and the team will have
seen, covering several key areas.
We will look to progress through that, of course, with some flexibility,
as necessary to ensure we can get the questions across
and receive the answers appropriately.
Our first question is from Vanushi Walters.
Thank you.
I have a few of appropriate questions. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and firstly, just recognizing, Minister, the
complexity
of your work at present. Also recognizing, Mr.
Corry, the complexity of your work and that of the MFAT team here in New
Zealand and across the world. Very complex times that we're
in, and also want to acknowledge that hopefully we're at a turning point in
terms of the Middle East crisis. So, the big
overarching issue here is the budget lines, and we've seen an increase to
the budget without any requirement to make cost savings.
So a nice broad question to kick us off.
What do you expect, Minister, that we'll see in terms of the impact of that
additional investment?
Well, to be frank with you, it's been a
long-held personal view
that if we want to be back in the front of the world, in the first world,
then we're going to have to make some decisions going forward, which we should've
made a long time ago. Which wise economies like, for example,
Singapore
and then Ireland and others made,
uh, and Croatia is making at this present time.
In short, they have two and a half more
times to two and a half more people in the field, because they understand that if
you're an export-dependent nation, you need more
people on the ground internationally.
Now, I'm saying this here because although it looks successful to some in this
country as to how we survived the last budget, personally, I
think we have got to as a country, across the political divide,
understand we want to get ourselves back in the front.
There are certain investments we've got to make, and this is one of them.
Thank you, Minister. You mentioned more people in the field.
What are the expectations in terms of FTE?
Has the ministry been exempt from the public sector
efficiencies measures?
Do you want to take this one, Joe?
Sure. Certainly,
Minister. Thank you for the question.
On headcount expectations,
ministers have set,
ministers plural, have set an in-principle target, I think as you all know,
of a public service that is smaller by, I think,
8,700 public servants by July
2029. And they've indicated that they'd like that to be met through milestones in
the coming years.
We are looking at the implications of that request,
but at the same time, I'm obviously very mindful that the minister himself
has views on the appropriate size of the ministry and where the headcount cuts
should apply.
Thank you.
Just as an example, we've got 58 posts, right?
Croatia, not long out of communism, with two million less than us, has
got 86 posts.
Right.
See what I mean?
But it's just a personal view.
Hope that it takes off one day.
Thank you. And just in terms of the increase and
being not asked to make any cost savings measures, that does seem
unusual in the context of what we've seen in other departments.
Was that an instruction at one stage of budget
discussions? And was that changed over the course of
discussions?
No, it was a triumph of common sense.
How could you possibly have negotiated that?
But I
seriously mean it. We've got to have a reflect.
The last time somebody put their mind seriously until
three occasions has been the foreign minister, 2005, 2017, and
2023. The only person who ever gave any thought to that was a guy
called Norman Kirk,
who understood if we wanted to be somewhere to put the money in.
And he had a go on that, it went from 52% of the budget,
0.52, straight down to some of the lowest in the
OECD. And here we are, way out in the Southwest Pacific, an
export-dependent nation. Critically, since
1882, we still don't get it.
Just one follow-up. Does the minister have any concerns for the outlier years
in terms of budget reductions?
No, because I'm focused on the election in 2026.
Excellent.
I'll handle that then.
Teanu Teuila.
Yeah. Thank you, Minister, for those opening remarks.
I did hear you mention- The Pacific Island Forum and just sort of
noting that significant both for the region but also for New Zealand
as well. And I was wondering about some of the issues you think
will be planned in terms of that, in terms of the
issues of interest both here and across the Pacific.
Constituents have gotten hold of me continuously around the issue
around West Papua. I know that is significant for many Melanesian
countries as well, so I wonder if that's going to play a feature as well.
You also mentioned climate adaptation.
Is that going to play a part in terms of the planning of the forum
and any other issue that might arise?
New
Zealand was a
leading country in terms of
the change in status of Timor-Leste.
That goes back a long, long time.
When you talk about West Papua, you're talking about something else.
You're saying
that they are the largest Melanesian
group in the Pacific,
bar one.
It's not Indonesia. Is that what you're saying?
What I'm saying is that it's actually an issue of concern across the Pacific, and
often we do get people from West Papua who
come to the parliament to raise it as an issue and of course, parliamentarians
across the Pacific as well. So my question is, is that going to feature as part of
the planning of the Pacific Island Forum?
You go.
I think before we get to our own chairing of the forum in
2027, of course,
there is a forum in 2026 to be hosted by Palau.
So obviously we don't want to be
right now preempting what list of issues are going to arise a year from now
when, out of respect to the upcoming hosts, we want them to get through
their own year.
On the specific issue of West Papua, there are decidedly mixed views
across the forum membership about whether it should have a place
on the PIF agenda.
So I think that's a matter in which as chair next year, we would be in
listening mode, but we'd want to be attentive to the fact that there are
crosscurrents on that particular topic.
Otherwise, obviously, our chairing next year is a chance to really drive home
that concept of PIF centrality. We want the Pacific
Islands Forum and its member states to be the group
around which Pacific solutions are found to Pacific problems.
And embedding that idea, I think, will be a really important part of our
year in the chair. But it is well over a year away, so we don't
want to get too ahead of ourselves.
Can I say on the second part of your question that we're putting all efforts we
can put into
regional sustainability
in the Pacific when it comes to the question of climate.
There are various views about climate, but what is not doubted
is that resilience is a key thing here, and we
have put in a lot of effort to get international
engagement and assistance to help with our resilience program
for the Blue Continent. And to be honest, we've honestly done
stunningly well and can do far better.
So we've got commitment out of
Scandinavia, we've got commitment out of the Middle East, and we're never going to
stop. We'll keep on asking because if you don't ask, the answer's always going to
be no, to see other countries to engage in this and to help us on
this cause of building resilience,
population by population.
We said commitment out of the Middle East, which countries are you
talking to?
Well, the Emirates are in, and we believe Saudi Arabia will be in.
But too soon on case of one of them, but it's been put to them,
and which was the country in Scandinavia?
Denmark.
Yeah, Denmark said they're in.
And for a sizable sum. So we want to put together a
significant pool, be ultra careful about ensuring that as the people that
ask them for it, that we make sure the money is spent for that purpose
rigorously.
And could just-
But I think if it could pass the standalone straight situation, I think we'd be on
our way to do far better than we have been in the past.
And just one last supplement.
How would that be kind of operationalized in
terms of the way that we can center Pacific Island
voices in terms of how that cooperation might unfold across the Pacific?
Could you talk to us about that?
Well,
this is really a suggestion, but it means the forum
based in Fiji must be more focused on some of these critical issues as part
of passing this process. We can go out and find the money.
We've got to make sure it's been spent for the right purpose and is enduring and
lasts,
it's suitable for the future to meet the challenges they might
face. But it's seriously a challenge that we have taken up and which
we have got
commitments far wider now than people would have thought, even
from Brazil.
So obviously over the last few years, we've seen very strong engagement in the
Pacific region from yourself, I think visiting every PIF
nation in one term, pretty impressive achievement.
And with a solid budget still in place, can you give us some insight around the
importance of that engagement in the Pacific Island Forum,
going forward and whether you expect that will continue or should continue?
Well, anybody that understands the Pacific knows that
we're a face-to-face people.
Worse than the Green Party.
We like having conversations and discussions. Sorry, this is not a put.
But we're a face-to-face people that like to have discussions and sort things out.
And you'll see it in even in their establishments,
the number of
what we would call the equivalent of a Marae that you'll see in Samoa is in every
village, but it also is deep throughout the Pacific And so
turning up face-to-face, there's no substitute for it. You can't do it with...
You
can do it over the phone, you can do it in email, but it's nothing like
face-to-face.
Mm.
And that's why we put the effort in.
We've been to all 70,
and it's been exhausting. I make no bones about it.
But
some parts have also been absolutely inspiring.
For example, to see the hospital that we've been part of building in
Kiribati is something worth seeing.
It's world-class in every respect.
Environmentally built. You can walk around the whole place carefully with a darn
microscope and can't find one fault, one mistake anywhere.
It is something that we should be so proud of.
Excellent. Still on-
Still on-
As a view?
Yeah.
Yeah, okay. Finish your waters.
Thank you.
So the ODA is the triennial budget, and one thing that popped out to me
was the underspend of 162 million.
So just the estimates compared to the actuals seemed quite
dramatic to me, and I was just wondering if you could speak to-
Join the-
... the reasons for that and which projects may have missed out.
Well, listen, Bernadette may expand on this, but this is the first year
of the triennium. And so the money,
the budget doesn't work like a customary one-year
budget. The idea is to spend the quantum, which is a bit north
of a billion dollars, over a three-year period.
And in the first year of a triennium, it's not uncommon to
undershoot,
because you're delivering quite big interventions which are designed to
unfold over a three-year period. Bernadette, anything to add to that?
No, spot on. And I should just, slight correction, we're in the second year
of the triennium.
I'm sorry, second year.
Yeah.
But we are confident we will meet the full triennium funding, and that's the reason
we have the multi-year appropriation, is because things are
quite variable. It depends a lot, of course, on what our partners, what's happening
in their countries as well.
Yes.
As to whether there's a change of government, there's a cyclone or something, that
means the projects might slow down, and then we'll catch
up in subsequent years.
We'll meet our target with one qualification.
If meeting our target is justified.
Our responsibility to the taxpayers to monitor it month by month, every
ounce of expenditure.
I think we came in at the end of the last triennium,
almost exactly on the dollar.
I think it was about 99.8%, I think so.
Good.
Can I ask a separate question on the total budget?
Yeah, sure.
Okay. Thank you. This is just on the India FTA.
So, is there, in your view, a need to
look at a budget allocation to meet
that investment requirement, which is additional effort,
essentially?
The 32 million New Zealand dol-
Yes
... 32 million New Zealand dollars?
Well, you could perhaps ask that question from Labour Party's point of view.
Your part-
No, no.
You're part of the coalition.
Yeah, but this is going to parliament. You've got a say.
If this parliament's got any power, if this is the final authority in this country,
then I could ask that question of you. What do you think of that?
So, the minister has said that
there'll be huge effort put into this, and Indians indeed
will be assessing that, if not on a year by year, certainly in 10, 5, 10,
15 years. So what amount
from this budget will go into the efforts to promote investment in
India?
Well, because it's not a fait accompli yet,
it's not been budgeted for.
But did you hear Morning Report?
Did you hear Morning Report this morning?
I usually do.
Oh, there was an expert on there
saying that this is a
policy shift and move to get ready for what might happen 30 years from now.
Did you not hear that? Because I certainly did.
No, actually, I remember hearing Morning Report some years ago, 2008,
when the China Free Trade Agreement was signed.
That's right.
That might have been you then.
Yeah, and what that minister said at the time was, he's not against the
deal, it was the quality of it. That where we were,
judged to be a developed nation up against a developing nation.
And if you thought China was a developing nation in 2008, you'd know about China.
That's the real point. And it took us till 2022 to get the
mature benefits of that deal. Why?
Why couldn't it be done the same time?
In this case, in India, we on day one give everything over.
When do we pick up the benefits? In this Morning Report, out comes this
expert and he says, it could be
the wisdom for this. He gave three criteria he had.
They were most unusual criteria. But they couldn't afford, he said, if they become
what they should be or could be 30 years from now, to not be there.
That was his rationale and logic behind this deal.
So we're going into the trade and diplomacy section, so that's a nice segue to
carry on into that section then.
So anyways, it's coming before parliament and I want to make sure that the
supremacy of parliament, it's a great democracy since 1854.
That's great. Well, look-
And the Labour Party, which began in the South Island and in
Blackpool in 1916-
Well, I-
... hasn't forgot what it's all about.
Just in relation to the India FTA, the biggest export from the
Buller is coal to India. And they're really concerned
that New Zealand First is not supporting it.
Can I just go into a primary?
I'm going to see more mining, is what you're saying.
Can I
say that we are facing indeed, if we've moved on to, yes, trade and
diplomacy. Sorry.
We hope that there's more settlement ahead
of us in the Middle East.
But looking back two years,
some say we took a timid, if not gutless, approach to what was happening in
Gaza.
How well has that approach served the interests of the
thousands, tens of thousands, of people who have been killed since then
until now
by arguably a state that is still
out of control?
Look, our difference was,
it wasn't a matter of if, it was when
When the conditions were stated existed,
whereas, and I won't point to which country, but they have been allies of ours.
They took the view that they laid out the criteria, they'd recognize it now,
and hope they met the criteria sometime in the future. You see the difference?
Now, you accuse us of being timid.
I don't think we've been timid at all.
I think we've been logical, rational, and sane about it, because we haven't got a
point of difference. But the contrast between these two countries,
who in many ways cooperate, is we said, "Not if, but when.
When they can do that, of course, we're going to do it."
And what they said was, "Well, we want them to do this and to recognize it now and
hope they do it sometime in the future." Now which one,
if you in any transaction in your life,
put aside this issue in Gaza, where would you follow that criteria as
being the wisest part of decision-making?
At the way we did it or the way they did it?
Minister, can I just follow on? We uphold, and
indeed in your statement here, our efforts to help shape emerging global
rules, in areas of UN,
WTO, WHO. Then why have we
ignored the rulings of the ICJ when it has come to the West
Bank and not spoken out
strongly against that?
But we have.
I don't know, we've judged people to be terrorists, named them,
including ministers
in the Israeli government.
Has it stopped?
Well,
way out in this part of the world,
we might have thought all our youth, going back 100 years, that we could change the
world from this part of the world.
We put a lot of lives-
We've continued to try
... we put a lot of lives at stake doing that. It didn't work.
We've continued to try, though.
Yeah, we do try. Yeah.
Is it New Zealand's assistant or is it Israel's assistant?
No, there's no input from the public in this session. Thank you.
We'll suspend the committee.
I'm just asking the question because-
We'll suspend the hearing a few seconds
... are we going to sanction Israel or-
Please sit down
... are we going to investigate Israel for the people that were in
tequila that were brutally beaten and
tortured-
You're interrupting the democratic process that this parliament undertakes on
behalf of all New Zealanders. You need to leave the room
... in the last month. I'm just asking the question.
No, you need to leave the room. You do not have the opportunity to ask questions at
this point.
Well, are we Israel puppets and-
Time to
leave
No,
can
I just say this? When you started that protest, when they got off the-
Free Palestine. We have the right
... when they got off the boat, they were medically treated by their own people.
None of them were found to be in this way and frame that he outlined.
We pray for Palestine.
It was when they saw their own people that this happened.
That's the truth of it all.
All right.
Okay.
Can I just very quickly apologize?
I certainly engage in robust discussion, but not for that.
My question was really,
given the ruling, and I acknowledge the original statement, but actually there's
been relative silence since that time, and we continue to
see what is internationally recognized as constant
law-breaking in the West Bank.
Well, the questions here do need to be related.
No, but that's fair enough because I think-
They certainly related to the question
... I think I put out a press statement in the last 24 hours.
Mm-hmm.
Again, reasserting the two-state solution.
Again, reminding people about the activities of certain Israelis.
We've been balanced on this matter.
Actually, a month ago that I spoke, exactly a month ago, I
spoke to the foreign minister of Iran on these matters.
And I spoke also to the
minister of state just a few days ago,
from
the United Arab Emirates. I do value their perspectives on this
matter. They don't find that New Zealand is down missing or lacking
in our response. In fact, they're quite the converse.
Okay.
Still on Palestine.
Next question from-
Are we still on Palestine?
Yeah.
Yeah, we're still on Palestine.
As it relates to the estimates-
Absolutely
... in terms of the commitments to-
... the budget going forward. Yes.
Thank you, Minister, and genuinely interested in having a good conversation on this
very important issue.
In the year ahead and beyond, as you consider
whether New Zealand will be recognizing Palestine, I just
note that we haven't always applied the
Montevideo Convention mechanically.
There have been times in the past when there has been
flexibility for political reasons,
including Croatia, Estonia, Latvia, the
Baltic states. So just in terms of recognition when borders aren't
necessarily secure and when there is political contention over certain
areas. Now we've had Canada, Australia, and-
Well, just can I just ask that. Are you saying that in all those countries, in
those circumstances Have any parallel with Gaza?
I'm saying that-
Or Palestine
... I'm saying that we haven't always adopted a very strict approach-
No, but I'm asking you, are you saying there's equivalency between all the examples
you gave to the one you just given?
And I'm suggesting that like-minded countries have
said that this isn't a strict application of the convention, but there
is a political impetus for recognition now
because it aids the two-state solution pathway.
And I think many people would suggest that that's a very sensible position for New
Zealand to take in the context.
Page to the right. You know something?
Every decision you make, if you've got any experience, you've got to think to
yourself, "And then what?"
And they never answered, some of our allies, that then what
question on this very issue. Because when did it happen the day after, and when
peace did finally, in a way it has changed, broke out in
Gaza.
What was their response then?
Well, I-
No, it's not satisfactory. It's not that, and nobody's happy about it, including
even some of the people you've got no time for are not happy about it.
Donald Trump's not happy about it at all either.
I completely agree with the minister and then what, there are absolutely other
things that do need to happen as well.
And just referring back to my colleague's question, it is
things such as the minister potentially speaking to colleagues about
a direction to the super fund not to invest in companies
associated with the West Bank. The UN has a published list.
So there are other roles that the minister could play in terms of
encouraging respect for human rights in Gaza.
Also speaking to the Israeli ambassador
about the arrest and detention of New Zealanders who've made some very
serious complaints about what occurred to them when they were
detained, um, and being clear about New Zealand's
expectations there. Potentially,
seeking investigations into those allegations as well.
The Australian have been-
Can I just say that the last lot of detainees were first met by
their own people. None of them reported them to be in that way.
I mean, I've seen people on TV whinging and whining about being beaten with guns,
with
sticks and all sorts of violence. Not one bruise on their face, nothing
at all. None of it could be anything within the way they framed it.
Now, this is only the last 48 hours that they were making this claim, and now
the evidence is checking back on, on what they were saying, because it just won't
stack up.
In relation, if I might add, to the, uh, unacceptable
actions by Minister Ben-Gvir-
Yeah
... we very specifically called that out and spoke to the Israeli ambassador about
it.
Yeah.
And spoke to the Israelis, uh, in Israel as well.
Okay, next question from-
Well, I just wanted to supplement
... it relates to-
Yeah, no, well, it was on this. It was, you did talk about,
um, in terms of the recognition of the state of Palestine, it's not if, but when.
And you talked about specific elements that need to be there in order for
you to have comfort. Could you talk to us a little bit about exactly
what those elements are? How many of them-
Well, look, I had a long conversation with the Palestinian Authority.
It was fascinating in a way because here I am talking to this Palestinian
Authority, and they're not talking to us in the way many of our opponents have been
shouting at us and screaming. They recognize that there are difficulties.
They recognize that, first of all, there's no democratic tradition that they've got
at the moment, and no criteria for that to happen at, instantly at the moment.
There's also a dissemination of many different peoples there
under the framework that quotes Palestine,
more than seven at this point in time. So it's all of those complications.
Talking to them is like light years away from talking it out in the public because,
uh, whether it was the Egyptians or whoever we've talked to,
they've all had the same sort of view that, you know, we've got to work to...
Of course, they want a certain outcome. They'll always recognize Palestine.
But when you get to the detail, how are we going to establish it?
They agree with you. It'll take some serious time.
And just to sort of what, what-
Okay, final one on this
... what, um, Venusi was saying as well.
What, uh, processes have you got in place, just in case there are more New
Zealanders who go over there to protest because this is a real important issue
for many people as well? What processes are in place in terms of that engagement
with the Israelis that people won't be beaten?
Well, the processes we've got in place is to tell them-
Or tortured or whatever
... the processes we've got in place is to tell them not to do it.
But if they exercise the democratic right-
Okay
... to go and protest, then-
Yeah, we're straying too far into the policy space
... what is actually in place? What is actually in place?
So we'll end that question now. That's something that you can take from the
Honorable Damien O'Connor. Sorry, Mr. Curry, we're moving to Mr.
O'Connor's question.
But I think it's important-
About policy conclusion.
We need to make sure that New Zealanders are safe.
Estimates is not about policy. You've had-
Mr. Chair
... an opportunity to stray somewhat off that
... I don't mind giving assurance that we've always gone out to help our people, no
matter what, no matter how many times they've ignored us.
Can I-
That's true.
Can I just a point of clarification. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
To, um, the minister. You said that, you know, the difficulties
in
Gaza or Palestine not having a democratic structure, and we understand that.
Um, so it makes it difficult. I mean, we signed a free trade agreement with China,
and they don't have the democratic structure.
But they do have a recognized state.
Do.
Which is a-
The question was over democratic structure.
It's been around a while.
It was over democracy that I was asking the question.
Okay, I'll shift now. I'm interested in the focus we're seeing going into Southeast
Asia, obviously a strong growth region, a region of important to New
Zealand. We've seen a prioritization of additional MFAT resource into that
area. Interested in your insights on what that focus looks like over the next 12
months.
Very good.
Well-
Yeah, there you go
... this has been an area of significant uplift under, um, the government's foreign
policy reset. So Asia was, the Asia uplift was one of the five
priority areas. And you've seen some significant achievements, um,
if you like, in the architecture of our relationships with that part of the world.
So we now have comprehensive strategic partnerships with, uh, Singapore,
uh, with Vietnam, uh, and obviously in North Asia with the Republic of Korea
Freshly with ASEAN, which has elevated New Zealand's status and is
a very significant marker of our standing in the region, and
a way of enabling our access at the political level to it.
It's something the government has invested a lot in.
You saw the Prime Minister's summit with ASEAN leaders in Kuala
Lumpur last year.
On the economic side, obviously Southeast Asia is a huge destination for New
Zealand exports. I think it's about $11 billion worth of exports a year.
So it's an area we'll continue to invest in.
We've obviously seen very successful visits from the region.
Prime Minister Wong's visit from Singapore late last year,
the Prime Minister's reciprocal visit in May this year, and we will
just simply be keeping up that effort
across the Southeast Asia region.
Excellent. I also saw earlier this week your press release
in relation to the extension of NZDF deployments
into both the Asian region and the Middle East region.
Just interested in your insights around the importance of that
contribution from New Zealand, despite our small scale, to those sorts of
international efforts.
Yeah, just to, I want to share something with you.
I was in the Philippines and seeing this, and at this meeting,
when one of these people from trade
said she had to leave,
and I asked why, and she said, "Well, I'm serving two countries."
And then about then I thought, does anybody back home realize how impossible it is
for this poor lady to do her job? There's two massive economies, and she's
trying to serve both of them, when if she had some resources like what I'm talking
about,
it is possible she could do much, much better. That's what I'm saying.
You can perhaps ask the other question he's asked.
I mean, we have, thank you, Minister, for
many years, we've been a contributor to security across Asia
and in Southeast Asia, particularly, going back a couple of
generations. Plays a very important role in preserving
strategic balance in the region, and plays a very important role in helping
to upskill defense forces in other parts of the region.
It builds habits of cooperation between our defense force and their counterparts
in other countries.
It plays both a security role, but it also helps amplify and broaden our diplomatic
effort as well, and as a way of building trust and confidence and transparency
about what our defense force does.
Excellent. Vanessa Lodders.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
So question about AUKUS Pillar 2. I'm just wondering whether
there's any capacity or resource allocated within the
forward-looking year,
for MFAT team members to be having conversations with either the
US or Australia about joining AUKUS Pillar 2.
Well, AUKUS Pillar 2 was entered into by the Labour Party
in August of 2021, if I'm correct.
Yeah, '21.
Now, when I say it
was entered by the Labour Party, it had all these features.
First of all, we would not become part of it until we were invited,
right? And this is where things are. Nothing has changed whatsoever.
So funny enough, it went on every day, maybe month, until the
2023 election without being questioned.
Not a mutter, not a murmur, not a syllable, not a sound from anybody.
But all of a sudden, the day after the election, AUKUS Pillar 2 becomes a major
thing because people like Helen Clark are concerned about it, who were silent
about it for two years before that.
So what we're saying is nothing's changed from when Labour first entered the
arrangement.
But am I correct that MFAT will be assessing whether
it is in New Zealand's interest to join AUKUS Pillar 2-
Just like the Labour Party committed us to in 2021, yes
... in an ongoing way? And as part of that consideration- ...
are we also considering what that might do in terms of our independent foreign
policy status?
Just like the Labour Party considered in 2021, all aspects, every
aspect, but this has got octopus features about it.
All eight sides of the damn thing,
of the tentacles will be looked at in every way, just like the Labour Party
committed us to.
In terms of that forward-looking piece, the Prime Minister made a
statement
about what the horizon of our strategic relationships look like.
He said that New Zealand could be a force multiplier for the US and the
Pacific, and he said something similar about Australia.
Is that the minister's view about the trajectory of New
Zealand's alignment, and what does that do for our independent foreign policy?
I have to read that speech. I haven't read it.
This was
from a Financial Times interview in 2024, I believe.
Yeah, no, I've not seen it.
But would the minister agree with that as a statement about our
foreign-
Look, I've learned from bitter experience, only agree when you've found out what
was said.
Okay.
Next question, Laura McLoughlin.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you, Minister, and in your opening remarks, you said
that you're adapting to the realities of the changing international system
by working through smaller groups of like-minded partners, and we know that
we are moving from a rule-based order to more of a power base, and New Zealand
has obviously benefited from the rules-based order.
I'm keen and interested to know what further work the ministry is doing
to have discussions with those like-minded countries to secure new
potential, whether it's trade, strategic partnerships like we're seeing with
Singapore, and how important and valuable you think they're going to be in
the near future, in the next at least 12 months.
Well, let me say something about,
Singapore has been an enormous help to us.
Mm.
Because one of the things it's done, it's taken itself since 1965 from
being a country supported by us on the Colombo Plan, where we had two
battalions there helping them out.
To rocketing past us because they got wise economic policies, brilliant
economic strategies to sell their countries, and a huge foreign service.
Mm-hmm.
So Singapore's got huge respect, and as a matter of fact, we
are frequently
very often in conversation with them on a lot of issues.
In many countries. But small countries matter.
This is our precept. We say
we're a small country, not geographically in size, we're not.
The same size as
the UK, same size as Japan, but with a smaller population.
But in the same way as we expect big countries to treat us as equals, that's the
way we treat the smallest countries in the Pacific. We don't talk down.
We don't dress down. We don't look down on them.
That's our promise.
Absolutely. And if the Ministry might want to tell me about any ongoing work
that they've got to develop some of those partnerships with the ones like
Singapore, maybe Canada, I don't know, I'm just throwing out some options, and
where to next after that deal that you've got with Singapore.
What other-
Sure
... countries are you looking to?
If you think about those five pillars of the government's foreign policy reset, it
is a response to the world that we find ourselves in, which, as the minister said
earlier, it's not the world we would prefer, but it is the world we are in.
So all the activity under those pillars is, in a way, our response to that
situation. If you think about it in the world of trade policy,
the pressure on the rules-based system, especially the WTO,
has led, in fact, to an intensification of interest and activity across the
board. Hence, you're seeing, I think there are now 11 aspirant
members to join CPTPP. You're seeing the CPTPP
EU, the CPTPP RCM dialogues. So in that area,
where New Zealand is very active,
that is a response to the pressure on those rules.
Elsewhere, we are looking at new fora and settings to
manage our interests in. I guess, the one that comes to mind most readily,
the one in which we are most active, is the Indo-Pacific Four.
It's New Zealand, Australia, Japan, and Korea, four significant
Indo-Pacific democracies. Its existence kind of began
as four partners of NATO, but it is now
developing a more-- well,
it's not leaving that behind, but it's also developing its own discrete
Indo-Pacific identity. As the minister's statement said, that grouping in
itself is now engaging with the European Union.
So I expect over time, we will see a proliferation of these kinds of forums
as countries seek to protect and advance their interests in a world
where the tectonic plates are starting to fracture more and more.
Teanau Tuiono.
Yeah. Just mine is around the uplifting capability and capacity,
uplifting capacity for consular services.
And I'm thinking specifically of the US and the Evelyn Wehi
case.
Following what
happened with that case, is there going to be capacity
built in, in terms of engagement
with ICE in particular?
Or what else is happening in that particular area?
And just noting that I did see that either this morning or yesterday,
that a judge did rule that actually she's being held illegally
by ICE as well. And so, what kind of
learnings can be made to be built into consular services to actually support New
Zealanders who end up being, in this case, illegally detained by
institutions like ICE?
Look, officials can tell you what they've done in the past.
But the reality is, unless this is a case of death,
or
somebody facing capital punishment,
given our resource base, the decisions have been made decades ago
what our limitations of help can be.
In this case, somebody which has left this country 25 years ago,
has made their future in a different country, namely the United States,
25 years ago.
And the embassy or our consular assistance has been all over this,
seeing the family, seeing the mother and others, and doing the best they can
in the circumstances in which they're working.
But again,
what's not being recognized here,
this person didn't fill the form out properly,
and there are consequences that have been signaled for a long time by the new Trump
regime. That's the hard end of the stick there.
And if you've signed up to the United States as the country you want to live in,
then you have to then look at Washington for your salvation.
Not surely saying, "Well, the country I just left because I'm an emigrator,
now owes me this responsibility." In the way the mother's been
maldescribing this picture here, which I find
enormously disappointing. I'm from a Māori background.
I'm as concerned as anybody else is if we can help.
But we ain't got the capacity, particularly in this circumstance, whereas
in other circumstances, we've got people out of jail who are facing a death
penalty.
By one conversation, strategically with one country up in Asia,
that happened to be a communist country, by the way, and that person got taken out
of jail. Now, sometimes we've pulled it, but we didn't boast about it.
But we did it. But that's very, very difficult in this
case.
Yeah.
Do you have concerns around, because ICE is a relatively new thing,
you could actually have citizens who are entering the country legitimately and
still being detained by ICE. We are hearing stories that that is happening.
And so in that circumstance, possibly not this one, what's the
capability or capacity?
Perhaps I can put this in a wider setting for the committee.
We, as a ministry,
deal with north of 22,000 consular inquiries a
year.
So I don't mean to trivialize or isolate a single case.
This is one case out of 22,000 inquiries
that we get every single year. We do our very
best to help New Zealanders in trouble overseas.
What we can't do is interfere in foreign judicial
proceedings. We cannot say to a country
where a New Zealand citizen has broken the law, "You need to give them a
free pass."
To address an earlier question you raised,
what we can do is provide very good advice through safe
travel about the risks that New Zealanders are taking when they travel to
particular countries.
So again, to go back to your earlier question, we are
not looking at significantly increasing our consular capacity.
We
take it very seriously.
We already have not just staff in Wellington who look
after that, but staff at our 58 posts around the world are active on it.
It's a very important part of what we do.
Just-
Next question, Tim Costley.
I'd just like to ask about
one of the work streams, which is around a renewed attentiveness to
traditional and like-minded partners.
And I wonder if you can just start by telling us what does that actually look like
in real terms to people that haven't spent their whole life working foreign affairs
and diplomacy? What does that mean? What does that look like?
What is the-- You spoke earlier about the IP4, but in practical terms, what
does it look like? How's New Zealand shaping itself for the future?
That's a fascinating question because you can look at the history of
like-mindedness, and then you've got the complication of
personalities.
Yeah.
A new foreign affairs minister turns up, and sometimes it doesn't work.
Right.
In fact, you'll know what I mean. So yeah, you like one, but you
not like one for the time they're there-
Mm
... so to speak. But Professor, you can describe that, would you?
Thanks for that pass, minister.
Provide examples.
The--
Thank you.
Do we have another one?
The
reason this matters, to start with that,
is the world is becoming a more contested,
a more volatile, and a more unpredictable place.
Small countries need powerful friends who share their values and interests.
So it's a logical leap from that to say it is worthwhile
keeping those significant relationships in really good shape.
Yeah.
Which is why you've seen significant investment
from the minister with his counterpart in Australia, Penny Wong, the
Prime Minister and Prime Minister Albanese,
for the trade minister with his counterpart, finance minister with her
counterparts, making sure that relationship is as strong as it
can be to help us weather the times that are ahead.
And there's a group of countries which naturally select themselves for that
role. Now, we often think of traditional like-minded as meaning the kind of
Anglosphere or the Five Eyes.
They are all enormously important to us, but we are very
mindful that we need to spread our bets and spread
our effort. So we look at a very significant
Indo-Pacific democracy like Japan.
What are the opportunities there for a stronger,
deeper, more resilient New Zealand relationship?
Traditionally been very strong. It's historically been a hugely important economic
relationship. But what is the potential for New Zealand and Japan,
for example, to work together on deepening their security
relationship as Japan
leaves behind gradually its post-war constitution and the
constraints that have imposed?
You might think similarly about Singapore,
other Indo-Pacific democracies like the Republic of Korea.
They're going to matter more and more to us in this world, which is becoming more
troubled. At the same time, there are long historical relationships
like that which we have with the UK, which remains a significant
stakeholder in the Indo-Pacific, and long may that continue,
as the UK continues to deploy its naval vessels, its
military, and its considerable soft power and ODA into that part of the world.
Just one thing to remember when I say that also.
Don't forget, often it's
an unusual circumstance where
the opposites in the political representation of two countries
actually works better than the similarities.
There's no doubt that
Helen Clark and
John Howard got on far better than Hawke and Monger.
There's no doubt about whatsoever.
And I've seen examples where two parties from the same conservatives here,
conservatives there, just don't get on at all.
Mm.
The other side, yes, and then they get on like charm.
So never
underestimate that happening as well.
And I guess if I can say one supplementary, so
you spoke, Mr. Cronin, your examples, and it's interesting, you effectively
highlighted the IP4 countries.
Mm.
But you also referred to Sing- I mean,
to the casual observer, it looks like the IP four or five years ago, no one
was really thinking in that space.
Maybe from the inside, I'm sure you were, but
whereas Singapore with FPDA goes back decades.
Mm.
But as we look forward in the budget period in particular and the initiatives that
are being funded, that the
government is signing up to,
what does that look like? What is, particularly when I think about the word
attentiveness, what is it? Is it doing things we weren't doing before?
Is it enhancing it? Is it just more of the same?
Is it the overlap with the minister referred earlier to some of the
military operations? Is it trade? Is it protecting those trade routes?
We heard in the defense committee this morning about
maybe unmanned
maritime vehicles like the Bluebottle and how that can help.
The Secretary of Defense talked about needing to protect trade routes as far as the
Middle East. But what does that attentiveness look like in
real terms?
So it starts at the top with leader-level, foreign minister-level engagement,
thickening up those relationships.
And not just as the minister's talked about the very important personal chemistry
element, it's actually about building architecture.
So if you look at some of these agreements that we've concluded, the comprehensive
strategic partnerships-
Yeah
... they frame up annual meetings of leaders or foreign ministers or trade
ministers or finance ministers. Now, that's really important for New Zealand
because otherwise we're left knocking at the door every year to say, "Could we
meet? Could we meet?" We get the new status that we've got through these
agreements. It helps lock in that high-level contact.
So that's the starting point. Relationship by relationship, that
attentiveness can mean anything from deepening a science relationship-
Through to more defence exercising.
There's no set template, it's a set of ever-deepening
activities. It can involve agreeing free
trade agreements. It can involve enhancing existing ones.
It all depends on the particular country.
Going back to a nuance you touched on earlier, though, I don't mean to sort of
isolate out Singapore from the IP4.
Sure.
Singapore is
not in the IP4 because it did not obviously have that Ukraine
vocation that the other four had.
Mm.
It remains an increasingly important country to New Zealand.
And I'm sure we can provide the committee, if there's interest, or your own
office,
with the details of what we have agreed with these countries, because that gives
you an idea of what attentiveness looks like in practice.
Thank you. Okay, we'll move to Vanushi Walters, and then we'll move on to the
International Development Cooperation section.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. In the troubled world that we're
in, I would have thought that New Zealand would want to lean into its
multilateral relationships. And I do note that the minister
chose not to agree to the World Health Organization's
updated 2024 rules. So the question is whether the
minister would consider that in the coming year ahead.
And if not, why not, given the advice
suggests that it would be a positive thing for us to do?
Well, two things. I saw
an event arise in Wuhan
when 2.8 million people moved through there
before the WHO made up their mind what they were looking at.
This was alarming in the extreme in terms of accountability and performance.
But it wasn't until that that was my concern, was when they decided that rather
than have countries having the domestic authority of
their governments to make their decisions, that they would proclaim from
their office what the pandemic situation would be, and we would take it or
leave it. That is not what we signed up to way back then, any
more than the UN trying to behave that way.
And I'm interested in those organizations getting back to their primary
reason for being established, in which we gave the support willingly and would go
on doing it willingly if they maintain remaining inside the prescription
that was set for them in the first place.
But I think what happened in Wuhan is really inexcusable, and we still haven't
had an answer
as to why they didn't pick what they were looking at.
Thank you, Minister. Just in terms of trajectory of the WHO, they
also have a pandemic agreement. So,
one that is much more looking at coordination that's currently being
negotiated.
Is it our intention not to sign on to that agreement once
it's concluded?
Our position is to make it very, very clear what we regard as the sovereignty
of our country and the paramountcy of New Zealand'ss parliament.
It's the choice of the New Zealand people and has been since 1854.
Is the minister considering New Zealand leaving the WHO?
No, we're not saying that. We'd rather be positive and try and turn the
organization back to what it should be doing.
Okay. Moving to-
And not having
what you see so constantly, and you saw recently in terms of the
immigration department of this country, massive bureaucratic override verging on
criminality.
Okay. Moving on. Last one. I look at-
Can I just ask the minister that he gives an assurance that he will support
the high-performing area of MFAT, and that's
the trade directorate, to ensure that they have adequate resources in the future?
Well, I will try to, that's... Well, trade is the number one reason to trade.
And everything I've ever said about the need for foreign affairs to be beefed up is
to do with trade.
Because we're in,
a famous guy that brought a troubled background, nevertheless, he wrote a book
called The Instability of a Dependent Economy. Do you remember who he was?
Come on. Such.
He wrote a book called The Instability of Dependent Economy. Don't we get it?
We've got to get out there and trade our butts off.
And so everybody says that until you ask for the money,
and so you can't see them for dust and small pebbles.
All right. Section four, International Development Cooperation. Vanushi Walters.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So, it's a question about buying
power. I just wanted to know what the value of the aid
budget for the current triennium is compared to the previous
one in terms of inflationary costs.
So what is the actual buying power comparison?
Thank you. I don't have that statistic in front of me.
I can give you the overall statistic is, in the last triennium was
3 billion point 16, and this triennium is 3 billion
point 060. So we're
very similar in number. I know we did do some maths on it, and I want to
say, I just can't remember the timeframe, but I think our buying power's decreased
by about 27%-
Yes
... due to inflationary pressures.
But I think you've hopefully got the number in front of you.
Yes. So perhaps I could check my numbers.
So I've got
the current figure as 2.6 million compared to the
3.06, which would be a reduction. So
essentially, that will mean a reduction in projects?
Yes, that will mean a reduction in projects or it might mean a reduction in
the number of different things that we try to do.
And I guess this is one of the challenges, in inflationary environments or
high-cost environments. And it's one of the things that we're thinking through
quite a lot now in relation to the impact of fuel increases,
is just making delivery of development programs more
expensive. And that's a challenge.
And which programs is it likely to impact?
We'll kind of have to do it almost program by
program. There'll be things that will be in train already that we will just maybe
have to increase the cost of or decrease the scope of.
Mm.
And there might be others that we therefore just have to defer or put on a longer
timeframe. So-
Just given the context of development
aid decreasing across the globe and here in the Pacific-
Yeah
... was there thought given to seeking an increase
Through the triennium costs to allow for that inflationary
cost.
There was an uplift of just more of $100 million-
Yeah
... in budget '26 over the next four years.
Yeah, for the next
triennium, there's an extra $100 million that's coming in.
Okay. So it will just be this triennium where we're seeing the purchase power drop,
and then we should-
Yeah, but the 0.27 figure, sorry, the 27%
figure you gave can't be right.
Work it out again.
That was the-
If your '26 when it was 32, then
27% doesn't fit.
So the information I had from WTQ was that
the 2.6 is the real purchasing power comparison.
And-
That is-
Over what timeframe? I think maybe that's-
Over this
2024 to '27.
I think
compounding the complexity of this or confusing things is the fact
that in 2022, the
former government announced a significant but one-off
increase in the ODA budget for climate finance reasons.
Yes.
But that money wasn't forward budgeted.
It was simply a time-bound four-year contribution. Am I right, Bernadette?
Yes.
On that. So that can
artificially indicate a drop, whereas in fact, the
comparative figure in some ways is 2021.
Yeah.
A supplement.
Could it also be the case that just spending more isn't necessarily a measure of
success?
Mm-hmm.
I've done this one before.
Yeah. Always.
The point is that-
Always. Yes
... just throwing money at something doesn't necessarily deliver better outcomes.
Yep.
The loaves and the fishes.
Okay, Tiano, to the honor.
Yeah, just to supplement there, when you were talking about earlier about the
potential to reduce the scope of projects or
to deprioritize projects, could you talk to us
about which ones are sort of at the top of the list in order of priority?
And if you could also talk about the impact, particularly,
first of all, in the Pacific, but then also around
that humanitarian aid part to Gaza,
in whatever way that that is delivered,
and any other kind of associated project.
Particularly the ones that might be losing out.
Yeah. We haven't
done it at that level yet because I guess we have a triennium budget, and we
just work to that triennium budget.
And I guess throughout the life of that three-year cycle,
projects change and cost structures change, scope change just
naturally, and it might be through something that we've decided, or it might be
through something our partner has decided.
It might be through something like a natural disaster or something that's
happened that actually means that the project has now had to be either paused or
completely re-scoped. So they're quite fluid things.
So we haven't got a list of ones that we will just deprioritize, but
we have our four priorities kind of for the
development program, generally around governance and democratic
institutions, security, climate adaptation, and
economic and social resilience. And so that tries to guide
our program activities sort of across the board.
And so the governance aspect, and we did talk earlier
around
the components around the occupied state of Palestine.
Does that feature in any of the kind of
aid or funding going into support projects of that nature,
or?
Far less so. For our rest of the world or our
humanitarian contributions, we tend to do them through big humanitarian
partners that we know can deliver in very challenging
circumstances. So,
for the occupied Palestinian territories in the current year is
$10 million that we've put through the World Food Program, UNICEF, and
International Red Cross. So we tend to try to support partners that we know
can actually deliver on the ground.
Is that up from last time?
I don't have that in front of me. I can find out and let you know.
Supplementary Venetia orders.
What is the split between multilateral versus direct
aid?
So we have
in our multi... Well, hmm, okay, a little bit complex, but bear
with me. So in terms of our overall window, we have a
minimum of 60% that we need to provide to the Pacific.
So that's our-- And in the current, we're at 63.5%.
Then we have in South and Southeast Asia, we put in 13%,
in humanitarian 9.5%,
multilateral 9.5%, and the rest of
the world 3.5%. And we have 1% which goes for our
monitoring and evaluation and research. So that's our sort of our...
And now
when I say multilateral at 9.5, some of that multilateral funding will
also go potentially to programs, to partners, UN partners
that operate in the Pacific, maybe UNDP or something.
So it's a
bit of a jigsaw to put together, but that's kind of the
balance of it.
Okay, next question, Laura McClure.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Given the fact that some of our like-minded partners, the US in particular,
have pulled their funding out of the Pacific, has that
changed our priorities in the Pacific and the programs that we're
delivering? Have you had to reprioritize how we spend?
Yeah, it's a really interesting question.
And the US,
while they've done significant cuts,
it has had some impact on the Pacific, but less in the Pacific than other parts
of the globe. And a big part of that is because
New Zealand, Australia, and Japan have basically maintained their funding level.
So it hasn't been quite as difficult, but that goes back into some of the
multilateral agencies that deliver in the Pacific that relied on
US funding. So there are some areas where we have lent in, or
ourselves and Australia have actually picked up the slack of something if it's a
project that we believe needs to continue And halfway through
It's a serious work in progress. Rubio promised me that they,
first of all, the first bit of it was that they were going to do a complete review,
and it'll be over by May 2025.
Mm.
And the last time I asked him, I asked him, "What happened to the review of May
2025?" He said, "Well, it'll be over." And yeah, they haven't sorted out, and he
said it'll take a bit longer than he thought.
The reality of it is, we've not given up on the fact of influencers and
saying to them, "Look, you're going to have to be back into this part of the world.
It happens to be and has always been your front yard, not your backyard.
It's our front yard, too, and we desperately need them to be engaged." That's
one of the tuna deal and other arrangements like that there.
But frankly, they could be, for peanuts for
them, of enormous help to us as we try to enlarge the number of
component parts of funding our Pacific and
foreign policy and aid and, well, maybe as
important, economic development plans.
Yeah, no, so can I just hop on that quickly?
Given the Pacific is so important to us in New Zealand then, have you, Minister,
thought about,
where we do put aid into other countries that are much further away
around reevaluating that spend back into the Pacific?
We sort of did it way back in
2017, '18, when
I was last Minister of Foreign Affairs, when we had a Pacific reset and announced
it, and I was--
to the world that we were going to focus far more on the Pacific.
And so at the moment, we're a bit ahead of where we were and where I commit, but
we're past 60%.
Of course, we'd like to do other things, but, well,
in the case of the phrase 'charity begins at home,' the Pacific is our home.
We've got to enlarge our concept of the home here, and that's what we're trying to
do. But of course, the moment you get out downtown, with the cost of
living crisis they're regarding as Uptown Wainui.
It's not quite the same that we're trying to do, but this makes it difficult.
Venetia Shwalter.
Thank you. Mr. Curry, you mentioned the climate
finance commitment, and I think it was eight hundred million that
was ending '25, '26,
and is now mainstreamed into the existing budget.
Can you tell us how much is allocated to climate finance in the
mainstream budget?
I don't know that we have a particular
amount. I want to say it's sort of two hundred and fifty odd million
that has been tagged. So every activity we do,
we tag it to sort of a range of different things, whether it be, say, governance or
climate or economic empowerment or social.
And then we
can kind of keep a track on where our spending is.
But our basic spend is about the same on climate finance as it
was previously since the commitment ended
end of last year.
Is it--
I understand that it might not be a requirement of OECD, but certainly a
direction that climate finance stays separate and is
reported separately. Is that considered in terms of mainstreaming?
Yes, and because remembering our climate finance commitment, which was the one
point three billion, it was five hundred was already of
existing development funding, and eight hundred was of additional
funding that came from the Climate Emergency Response Fund at the time.
And so we already were doing a lot of climate activities.
And so by the mainstreaming, we will be able to tell you, and I just haven't got it
in front of me, what we still tag as climate finance.
So we will be able to meet our OECD requirements in terms of just what that
is. Sorry, I just don't have it in front of me. But we can provide that.
Thank you.
Yeah. Would you like that breakdown?
That would be good. Yes, please.
No problem.
Okay. We'll move now to Antarctica, section five.
There's-- oh, sorry. Honorable David Seymour, did you have one on that?
Look, there's one that I know the Minister of Trade has a considered interest in,
in Africa, which is a long way from here.
It is, yeah.
But it is the new frontier of,
I guess, potential new frontier and opportunity for us as a trading
nation. Is there any consideration of alignment between
aid projects,
pragmatic ones, into that continent that might complement what might
be growing efforts or focus on trade?
We have a very small development footprint in Asia.
And as you would've seen, I think the numbers that we had of the rest of the world
was three point five, so that includes Africa.
But we do have a couple of projects still that we're doing largely
through in partnership with the African Union, and they are largely
agricultural and other sort of trade-based projects to pick up on things that
are our natural area of expertise that would, an African country might look
to us for, so. But I'm not going to lie, it's pretty small.
Does the minister have-- What do you think about that direction of
travel?
Yeah, I have. But they say the
world's getting smaller, but it's not actually.
It's actually getting bigger in terms of our focus and our concentration.
I've got no really answers for you on that.
I kind of think we've, given the budget we've got, we've got to stretch out like a
Shanghai now.
Yeah. Right. We'll move now to section five on Antarctica.
First question, I've got Dr Shane Reti.
Thank you.
The Christchurch gateway to Antarctica
contributes more than $100 million a year into the Christchurch economy and even
more into the wider New Zealand economy.
Other countries would like to compete for that, I'm sure, particularly for the
American launch off to McMurdo.
What is our thinking towards what we may need to do to maintain that competitive
advantage and hold those people into Christchurch gateway,
firstly? And my second question is around the sub-Antarctic territories of
which we're landholders. Is there any interest or progress in us
aggregating with other territories above 60 south in a
sub-Antarctic forum? So two questions if we can,
please.
Thank you, Dr Reti.
And thank you, committee members.
Perhaps I can answer, at least try and answer the first question around the
importance of the Antarctic gateway.
As you say, Dr Reti, it's, I think over the last two years, it's put $133
million roughly into the Christchurch economy.
So it is a very important economic development and economic
generator for Christchurch, but also ...
carrying Antarctic activities put money into the floor of New Zealand economy as
well. So I know it's very important for us to
look at ways we can maintain that. One of the ways we're looking to do that is by
what the minister's focused on, is building other economic,
sorry, Antarctic cooperation activities.
So looking at new partners we can collaborate with and cooperate with
in terms of how we actually build our cooperation in the Pacific, sorry,
in the Antarctic, which is not only important to protect our interests through the
Antarctic Treaty System and protect our broader interests
as we see more geopolitical competition in that region.
But if we build those broader partnerships, for example, with countries like the
UAE, with Uruguay, with Chile, with the UK,
countries that are not necessarily all Antarctic or traditional Antarctic Treaty
System partners, but they are important countries that are looking and are getting
increasingly interested in how they can contribute to Antarctic science, Antarctic
cooperation.
And
some of them are treaty aspirants themselves.
They are also looking for partnerships in practical ways with New Zealand, and we
see opportunities there to build, for example, economic sort of partnerships,
cooperation initiatives there with some of those new partners.
So, as well as continuing to build up our existing
partnerships through the Antarctic Gateway in Christchurch, it's
also how we look at future partnerships and how we can take advantage, or not take
advantage of them, but how those can be mutually advantageous to us in terms of
ensuring that the gateway continues to be an economic opportunity, and
a benefit to not only Canterbury, but for the rest of New Zealand as well.
Okay, thank you. And the second question was an aggregation of Southern Antarctic
interests above 60 south.
Godfrey, if you allow me-
We could come back in written questions, it's no problem, but-
I'll defer to my colleague, Victoria, who may be more
appropriately
able to answer that question, and then I can answer any other questions from Scott
Basin.
Thank you.
There is, I understand, quite a lot of interest,
particularly driven by the science community directly in
collaboration between countries that have
sub-Antarctic islands.
It doesn't fall specifically within the responsibilities of the
Foreign Ministry because these, in New Zealand's case in
particular, the sub-Antarctic islands are part of New Zealand.
But I do understand there are some quite rich
discussions that are already underway.
And as we look towards the international polar
year in 2032, there may well be
more opportunity for harnessing some of these
initiatives.
And the
Department of Conservation also has been keeping an eye on it because a lot of the
interests are around ecosystem preservation and conservation,
and there may well be some lessons that can be shared
across the range of countries with sub-Antarctic
islands.
Thank you.
Next question, Vanuscha Walters.
Thank you. I note in previous expenditure, there
was a consultancy in regards to the legal services,
the Antarctica Environmental Protections Act.
And so my question is just around whether there are any existing legal or other
disputes that that was in relation to, or whether that was something entirely
different.
No, that wasn't in relation to any kind of dispute.
My recollection is that we
were having a look at our own regulatory practice to make sure that
we were fulfilling all the responsibilities,
and had used a consultant to help us think about that.
Excellent. Separate one.
Okay. Just on the redevelopment
down at Scott Basin.
Are we just going to end up with a bunch of prefabs?
Because we've wound it back from what was quite a visionary concept,
and I'm fearful that we might, like
perhaps the ferry terminals,
not end up with what is an adequate
infrastructure.
Well,
this country has had a history, as you know, for the last four decades
of cost plus, rip off the ratepayer and taxpayer, and it's happened all
over the country. Right. The only difference to that, or the
only exception to that,
was perhaps two things, but one was particularly the second Tauranga
bridge, which was built under cost and on time.
Everything else is just blown out, and you've seen in Transmission Gully.
You saw it time after time in the Auckland central rail links, whatever.
So in this case, they were commissioned to do a certain job,
then away goes the costs. In terms of their
calculation, was by the time we got back, it was so out of hand we had to stop it
and start it up again. Now we're not going to just have
prefab size things, but the idea of prefab build makes
a lot of sense because if possible, you'll see all
around Auckland this meantime, a lot of this stuff, it's concrete prefab, but it's
prefabbed. All ready to go, cable this, because they all said to just bolt
up and let's go for it. Now,
one time I found out they were going to ship down the building,
already built on the ship. I couldn't believe what I heard
when I heard that,
because their chances of things going wrong were just huge at that point in time,
and the cost is going through the roof, so.
So has it been finalized by way of, I mean, concept,
final costings and appropriations?
I wouldn't say finalized is the word, but working hard towards finalization it is.
With a certain prescription. Don't think they're
going to
pay more than maybe we asked for.
So is it more appropriate to have a beautifully designed building or a functional
building that can deliver on needs of-
Well, you want something for the next 6,000 years you can be proud of because it's
built for that purpose. But the idea, well-
We'll just add that to the cost, which has been from...
And I'm not blaming any political party, but we've let it happen over and over and
over again. Just tear your hair out. If you're in private business, you'd go broke.
Within six months, you'd go broke.
I'm interested in an update on the wind farm progress and how that will be
progressing over the coming season.
Perhaps you could answer that.
Yeah.
It is progressing well,
and although there've been some hiccups along the way,
as there often are in these complex,
long lead projects that require building in a difficult
environment, the wind farm is proceeding now
in accordance with plan, and we're looking forward to having it operational
over the next couple of seasons.
Under budget. Something to add
to that, Mr.
Thank you for this.
Yeah. Not much to add, Mr. Van der Molen, other than say that it is
quite an important part of our contribution to the joint logistics pool.
So what they're really looking to do is quite ambitious.
We currently have 330
kilowatt generators down there.
With the wind farm replacement, that'll allow us to do
generate with three 1 megawatt sort of generators,
which is a massive sort of contribution to both Scott Base and also
McMurdo as well. So, that wasn't paused as
part of the original pause to the Scott Base redevelopment project.
That continued throughout, so they have made good progress.
Antarctica New Zealand, as I understand it, recently carried out a review of the
initial design,
and it did find some issues, as Victoria alluded to.
But Antarctica New Zealand's very confident that those can be resolved within the
existing budget and any contingency that was attached to that part of the project.
So, it's not actually critical to ensuring the Scott Base rebuild more
broadly gets completed, but it is a massively important part of what we
contribute down on the Antarctica, including both to ourselves and to our US
partners in the joint logistics pool.
Absolutely. Minister Shawcross.
Thank you. I notice a reduction to
20.9 million for the research
function. So, just a question about whether that will
affect kind of the activity at the base, but
also our relationship with the US, who I understand there's
research overlap in that space as well.
Yeah, I
don't think so. I think it's probably a question in terms of Antarctica New Zealand
who manage the science projects.
Right.
But I think undeniably, science really is the only reason
where we justify our presence at Scott Base rebuild.
Yes. Absolutely.
So it is a very strong priority for us, it will remain a very strong priority for
Antarctica New Zealand.
And it's a very important part of our collaborative activities down on the ice as
well. So,
I think that it's interesting when you talk about the
Americans as well. There has been
some speculation as to whether or not the Americans are going to reduce their
investment in their
own Antarctic program.
They very recently just finalized an $8 billion contract to deliver that
Antarctic program. This is the National Science Foundation
over the next 20 years. So it seems that the Americans remain pretty committed to
their own Antarctic activities.
But going back to your question, I think for us,
science is always going to be a critical driver of everything we focus on and
do. But I think that the details, we can talk to Antarctica New Zealand and come
back to you with some more detail.
Thank you.
Teanau Tuiono.
Probably for the next session, so-
Oh, yeah. Okay. All right. Any final Antarctic questions?
Okay, we'll move now to
the few remaining minutes we have on any wrap-up questions members might not have
covered yet. Teanau Tuiono.
Yeah. So my question is on the status of the High Seas
Treaty.
And in particular, I want to know whether
there's legislation that's going to be ready to floor within the
next three months. And on top of that, the
sorts of conversations that you've had with governments across
Pacific in particular in terms of what that legislation might
look like.
I could answer that. The legislation is under
preparation,
and well advanced.
However, at this time in the three-year cycle,
every minute counts, so we
don't yet know when it will be possible for that to be
considered by Parliament. We are in regular
discussion with a range of partners.
We're participating in the preparatory commission meetings in New York.
And
every country develops the legislation so that
it fits their particular circumstances, but we have good visibility
of what other countries are doing and our approach is well
aligned with that.
Can you give us a sense of where the issue of bottom trawling in the
South Pacific is at in terms of the conversations and negotiations that you've been
having in these various meetings?
Your original question was about the High
Seas Biodiversity Treaty.
Yeah.
That treaty
doesn't specifically address the issue of bottom trawling.
Bottom trawling
is dealt with in a number of different regional fisheries management
organizations.
And
one that I'm most familiar with is the SPRFMO, the South Pacific
Regional Fisheries Management Organization, which has
measures
to regulate how bottom fishing takes place.
And what about conversations around deep sea mining? Is that featured at all?
Deep sea mining is covered by the International
Seabed Authority, which
operates under the Law of the Sea Convention.
That organization is based in Jamaica and
is currently developing a mining code to
regulate deep sea mining. And the ministry's
officials are regularly engaged in those discussions in Jamaica.
The next session will be taking place in
July,
and one of our senior legal advisors will be
attending to participate in those discussions.
And what's the current position on deep sea mining from the ministry's
perspective?
The position, and it's been a consistent position for
quite a number of years, is that mining in
the
area beyond national jurisdiction should not take place until
such time as a mining code is
adopted in order to regulate at that.
Okay.
All right. Any final questions in the financial office?
So, Minister, in the uncertain world that we're in,
unfortunately, we're in circumstances where there may be future
breaches of international law, future breaches of the
UN Charter. And I wonder if I can get an
understanding of how MFAT and the minister
arrive at a position in regards to whether we call
those breaches out or not.
Call a breach out before it occurs?
No, once it has occurred.
How we get to a position of
either deciding to call that breach out or not.
Well, probably based on our past experience.
And-
That'd be the most practical, clever way to handle things
... that's-
Use your experience to the max with past events and see how they can, in
equivalency, be arranged around your decision on this matter.
So the example in the past is, of course, Israel and the
US actions in Iran, which weren't called out.
But we have potential threats going forward in terms of Cuba, and
there have been times in the past when New Zealand has called out a breach of
international law and the charter, even without a Security Council
decision or an ICJ decision.
Well, if you think 57 years of supporting foxy terrorism all around
the world, including places like Argentina and elsewhere, where I go there and I
find that 86 people were murdered as a consequence of our engagement.
Two events recently in Australia represents that.
If you think 57 years of that is a case of not
calling something out, I think you couldn't be more wrong.
I'm looking at the 40-point police plan here right now, and what I'm
hoping for is the one thing that doesn't, and most paramount in my mind
anyway, is the nuclear safety going forward.
Because I think that is the number one outcome, and if we don't have nuclear
potential safety, I think this will have been a massive mistake.
Correct.
So every judgment we'd make on this matter would be based on our past
experience.
It's not possible to speculate on any potential response to a future
hypothetical situation.
That's a knock on the button.
All right. Very good. That brings us to the end of today's session.
Thank you very much, Minister.
By the way, talking about small countries, we're seeing the Prime Minister of Costa
Rica in 20 minutes' time.
Ooh.
Yes.
So small countries do matter.
Yes. It's a lovely meeting again too.
Thank you.
Thank you to the ministry as well. And Ken, I'll just actually on behalf of the
committee, our thanks to the ministry and all members on posts around the
country.
Thank you very much. We will pass that on.
Thank you.